Introduction to WebC (#20)
5t3ph/11ty-rocks: src/posts/introduction-webc.md

All without having to ship a single line of JavaScript to the client — unless you want it to.

## WebC in a nutshell

First and foremost: WebC components are just HTML. If you already know how to write HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, you are ready to start working with WebC.

Let’s define our first component: a footer for our site. We’ll create a file called `site-footer.webc` and put in it the following HTML:

```html
<footer>
  <p>&copy; 2022 Yours Truly</p>
</footer>
```

Now we can use a `<site-footer></site-footer>` custom element and WebC will replace that element with the markup from `site-footer.webc`.

> For the purposes of this article, we won’t concern ourselves with [importing components in WebC](https://github.com/11ty/webc#html-imports-kidding-kinda). When you set up the WebC plugin for Eleventy, you can [configure a directory for global components](https://www.11ty.dev/docs/languages/webc/#global-no-import-components) so that they’re always available.

So if we have a file — `page.webc` — with all of our HTML boilerplate, we insert our footer into that file using this custom element.

> ```html

Reviewer: Let's add comments in the code sample to emphasize the template since we can assume `.webc` is an unfamiliar extension and it otherwise looks like an HTML file. (and we know folks skim and may not see the name in the preceding paragraph 😉 )

```
<!-- page.webc -->
```

  <body>
    <site-footer></site-footer>
  </body>
</html>
```

When we process `page.webc`, the resulting HTML will look like this (give or take some whitespace):

```html
<!doctype html>
<html>
  <head></head>
  <body>
    <footer>
      <p>&copy; 2022 Yours Truly</p>
    </footer>
  </body>
</html>
```

## Single file components

At this point, it may still be unclear what advantages we get by using WebC. After all, many of the template languages that Eleventy already supports allow you to import partials from other files like this. But what WebC can add to even this basic use case is the single file component authoring experience.

Single file components (SFC) are common in JavaScript frameworks such as Vue and Svelte. An SFC is a single file that contains HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. They often follow this structure:

```html
<script></script>

<!-- Markup here -->

<style></style>
```

Going back to our `site-footer.webc`, we can colocate the styles for our footer with the markup.

```html
<footer>
  <p>&copy; 2022 Yours Truly</p>
</footer>

<style>
  footer {
    padding-block: 3rem;
    padding-inline: 1rem;
  }

  footer > p {
    font-family: fantasy;
  }
</style>
```

> One advantage to writing your components this way instead of having your markup and styles in separate files is that when you’re markup changes, it’s easier to remember and update the styles. If we introduce a `<div>` to our footer to wrap the paragraph at some maximum width, our (admittedly contrived) `font-family` declaration will no longer apply to the copyright notice in the footer. Being able to see the markup and styles right next to each other helps us keep them synchronized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One advantage to writing your components this way instead of having your markup and styles in separate files is that when you’re making changes, it’s easier to remember and update the styles. If we introduce a `<div>` to our footer to wrap the paragraph at some maximum width, our (admittedly contrived) `font-family` declaration will no longer apply to the copyright notice in the footer. Being able to see the markup and styles right next to each other helps us keep them synchronized.
```

> > When you have a component that is just HTML, WebC will replace the custom element with that HTML. But as soon as you introduce either a `<script>` tag or a `<style>` tag to the component, WebC will, by default, leave the custom element in place in case you are using it in either your scripts or your styles. You can tell WebC to remove the custom element by adding [webc:nokeep](https://www.11ty.dev/docs/languages/webc/#webcnokeep) to the custom element.

Reviewer: Maybe switch this out of blockquote and add a headline like `### Custom element tag rendering` or something like that?

### Asset bundling

When WebC processes your components and it finds `<style>` or `<script>` tags in them, it can extract those assets into bundles for you to use later. This allows you to collect your assets into a single `<style>` tag inside the page `<head>`, rather than leaving `<style>` tags strewn about your HTML. See the Eleventy docs on WebC for information on [how to include bundled assets in your final markup](https://www.11ty.dev/docs/languages/webc/#css-and-js-(bundler-mode)).

> > By default, when using the Eleventy plugin for WebC, asset bundling is turned on. If you are using WebC directly, however, bundling is off by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> By default, when using the Eleventy plugin for WebC, asset bundling is turned on. If you are [using WebC directly](https://github.com/11ty/webc), however, bundling is off by default.
```

### Scoped styles

One concern you may have about this single file component approach is that the styles from one component may leak into another. In our `site-footer.webc` component, for example, we have styles that apply to all `<footer>` elements; if we use a `<footer>` in any other part of our site, it will pick up that padding.

A common solution to this problem with SFCs is to scope the styles using some computer-generated unique class name. If you add the `webc:scoped` attribute to your style tag, WebC will do this for you.

```diff-html
<style webc:scoped>
  :host {
    padding-block: 3rem;
    padding-inline: 1rem;
  }

  :host footer > p {
    font-family: fantasy;
  }
</style>
```

> Here we’ve added the `webc:scoped` attribute to our `<style>` element, and introduced the `:host` pseudo-class to our selectors. WebC now knows to generate a unique class for each `<site-footer>` it processes and to replace `:host` with a class selector matching this generated class name. So our HTML will end up looking something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we’ve added the `webc:scoped` attribute to our `<style>` element, and introduced the `:host` pseudo-class to our selectors. WebC now knows to generate a unique class for `<site-footer>`, which will replace `:host` with a class selector matching this generated class name. The generated class will be shared across `<site-footer>` instances. So our HTML will end up looking something like:
```

```html
<site-footer class="blarglargl">
  <footer>
    <p>&copy; 2022 Yours Truly</p>
  </footer>
</site-footer>
```

And the styles will be:

```css
.blarglargl {
  padding-block: 3rem;
  padding-inline: 1rem;
}

.blarglargl footer > p {
  font-family: fantasy;
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Did you know**: [`:host` is a native CSS feature](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:host) that is usually in reference to the shadow DOM root host of web components. WebC is using `:host` a hook to override with the generated scoped class.
```

## Slots

WebC supports the use of `<slot></slot>` for inserting markup inside your components when they’re used. And as with templates and slots for web components, you can define multiple named slots; something that none of the template languages Eleventy currently supports can do.

> To illustrate how this can be useful, let’s create a card component that needs to have a title, some media, and a brief description. We won’t concern ourselves with the CSS for this component, but let’s assume we’re doing some fancy things that require us to place the aformentione title, media, and description inside some wrappers. We can define `a-card.webc` like this:

Reviewer: Love this example! It really emphasizes how WebC is useful for static components 🙌

> WebC is for Single File Web Components

So what does all of this have to do with web components? Well, we can use WebC single file components as a convenient way to write and include web components — with templates and shadow DOM — in our sites. As a simple example, suppose we want to implement a theme toggle on our site that allows visitors to choose a light or dark theme, or to use whichever matches their operating system. We’re implementing this as a web component because it relies on JavaScript to switch the theme. Without JavaScript, the buttons wouldn’t do anything, so we don’t want them to be visible unless JavaScript is available.

We’ll call our component `theme-select.webc`:

```html
<script>
  class ThemeSelect extends HTMLElement {
    connectedCallback() {
      const template = this.querySelector("template");

      // Swap out the template with its contents so they become visible
      template.replaceWith(template.content);
    }
  }

  customElements.define("theme-select", ThemeSelect);
</script>

<template>
  <button>Light</button>
  <button>System</button>
  <button>Dark</button>
</template>

<style>
  theme-select {
    /* ... */
  }
</style>
```

> 

Reviewer: Include a blockquote callout here to note that the class format and `connectedCallback()` are native web component constructs and link to MDN docs that best fit perhaps?

> Now we can put `<theme-select></theme-select>` somewhere in our site, and we’ll end up with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can put `<theme-select></theme-select>` somewhere in our site, and we’ll end up with the following in our final, rendered markup:
```

... and delete the hanging part of the sentence below the sample

  <template>
    <button>Light</button>
    <button>System</button>
    <button>Dark</button>
  </template>
</theme-select>
```

in our final markup.

On top of that, WebC will bundle up the styles and JavaScript needed for this component, which we can place in the `<head>` tag, or at the end of the `<body>` tag, or wherever we need them. Since the buttons are inside a `<template>` tag, they will remain invisible on the page until the custom element is registered by our JavaScript and the web component becomes defined, at which point the `connectedCallback` runs, and extracts the buttons from inside the `<template>` so that they become visible and usable.

Of course, you could also set up a Shadow DOM inside of your web component, if you wanted to, but you don’t have to.

> There are plans to allow you to [aggregate arbitrary HTML](https://github.com/11ty/webc/issues/36) from your WebC components the way that styles and scripts are aggregated. This would mean that you could include a `<template>` as part of your component and guarantee that in the final markup there was only one copy of the template regardless of how many instances of the component you placed on the page.

> ## Learn more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learn more about WebC
```
